[ch18 -- NOTES]{.underline}

396 --- 'The EU set the ball rolling with first attempts to establish
ethical frameworks around privacy and data protection' etc: see "How
Europe became the world's top tech regulator", *CNBC*, March 25, 2021;
"Big Tech isn't ready for landmark EU rules that take effect tomorrow",
*Ars Technica*, Aug 24, 2023; "Facebook faces \$3.2 billion UK class
action over market dominance", *Reuters*, January 13, 2022; "Federal
Trade Commission Expected to Launch Effort to Expand Online Privacy
Protection", *The Wall Street Journal*, August 10, 2022; "Meta Pauses
Purchase of 'Supernatural' Developer as FTC Suit Proceeds", *Bloomberg*,
August 5, 2021. On a more cautious note: "We take a look at proposed Big
Tech regulations in the UK: Heavy on possible fines, light on
enforcement: Online Harms draft gets most things right, still gives
Facebook and friends too much leeway," *The Register*, 16 December, 2020

<https://www.cnbc.com/2021/03/25/big-tech-how-europe-became-the-worlds-top-regulator.html>

<https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2023/08/big-tech-isnt-ready-for-landmark-eu-rules-that-take-effect-tomorrow/>

<https://www.reuters.com/technology/facebook-faces-32-bln-uk-class-action-over-market-dominance-2022-01-14/>

<https://www.wsj.com/articles/federal-trade-commission-expected-to-launch-effort-to-expand-online-privacy-protection-11660182122>

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-08-05/meta-agrees-to-pause-purchase-of-within-as-ftc-lawsuit-proceeds>

<https://www.theregister.com/2020/12/16/uk_online_harms/>

396 --- 'I expect to be doing this for the rest of my life': If learning
Sonic Pi or Tidal or Foxdot is equivalent to learning guitar, SC is
violin. Lifetimes could be (and *are*) spent exploring it, supported by
a vibrant community including some transcendent coders doubled as
remarkable musicians---and vice versa. Much as I cared for Python and
its community, the longer I spent with SuperCollider the more I felt
like ET in the Spielberg movie, knowing I'd caught a glimpse of home. I
loved that the system's mid-Nineties creator was named McCartney
(*James*); that his interest in making it began with the Moog-based
classical reimaginings of Wendy Carlos' 1968 *Switched on Bach* album
then continued through the seventies work of hairy German "Kosmische"
masters Tangerine Dream---while tapping a computer music lineage
stretching all the way back to Ada Lovelace herself.

396 --- 'setting an example regulators in the United States and
elsewhere are following': see "F.T.C. Sues to Block Meta's Virtual
Reality Deal as It Confronts Big Tech," *New York Times*, July 27, 2022

<https://www.nytimes.com/2022/07/27/technology/meta-facebook-vr-ftc.html>

**397 --- '**it took seconds to sense the fingerprints of mainstream
Silicon Valley': This infiltration doesn't always come from the Valley
itself. Teachers there adopt tech jargon and ideas that will obviously
appeal to parents in the catchment area. For a glimpse of how this
works, try *Education Week*, November 1, 2017, "Schools Take a Page From
Silicon Valley With 'Scrum' Approach," about schools borrowing the
programming idea of Agile project management directly from big business.
I could cite hundreds of similar examples, many in Silicon Valley---but
by no means all.

<https://www.edweek.org/leadership/schools-take-a-page-from-silicon-valley-with-scrum-approach/2017/11>

397 --- 'how does an Amazon CEO justify earning *6,000 times* the median
salary at his company': against circa 350 across the economy (up from 61
in 1989 and 21 in 1965) . . . mindboggling details in "Amazon CEO Andy
Jassy earned 6,474 times the median Amazon employee's salary,"
*Fortune*, June 2, 2022; Economic Policy Institute, "CEO pay has
skyrocketed 1,322% since 1978", August 10, 2021.

<https://fortune.com/2022/06/02/fortune-500-amazon-ceo-andy-jassy-compensation/>

<https://www.epi.org/publication/ceo-pay-in-2020/>

397 --- 'at the end of 2022 Google and Twitter featured prominently in a
roster of companies trumpeting support for democracy, sex, gender and
race equality while providing financial support to politicians clamoring
to undermine those things': as reported in "Twitter donates \$25,000 to
anti-abortion political organization," by the excellent *Popular
Information* substack newsletter, August 3, 2022; see also "How
corporate cash could help make an extremist the next governor of
Pennsylvania," from the same source on July 28, 2022, along with "These
25 rainbow-flag waving companies donated \$13 million to anti-gay
politicians since 2021," June 2, 2022.

<https://popular.info/p/twitter-donates-25000-to-anti-abortion?utm_source=publication-search>

<https://popular.info/p/how-corporate-cash-could-help-make>

<https://popular.info/p/lgbtq2022?utm_source=publication-search>

398 --- 'as the *Silicon Valley* showrunner Alec Berg noted in
explaining why he and partner Mike Judge pulled the plug on their
popular show in 2019': as reported in "'Silicon Valley' Showrunners Talk
Ending HBO Series: 'It's a Different Kind of Comedy Now,'" *The
Hollywood Reporter*, December 8, 2019

<https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/tv/tv-news/silicon-valley-finale-explained-showrunners-mike-judge-alec-berg-break-down-final-episode-hbo-comedy-1260546/>

398 --- 'school curricula are moving this way': "A new curriculum for
the Netherlands including Computational Thinking", *LearnTechLib*, June
24, 2019; "Paving the Way for Computer Science in German Schools",
*Researchgate*, August 2018; "National curriculum in England: computing
programmes of study"

<https://academicexperts.org/conf/glearn/2019/papers/55328/>

<https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Paving-the-Way-for-Computer-Science-in-German-Schroeder-Bergner/24e1576c12347fba5c36dd3e104f09494b71077e>

<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-computing-programmes-of-study>

398 --- 'Calls for kids to be taught programming from as young as three
grow by the year': A few years back the distinguished British commercial
software pioneer Dame Stephanie Shirley noted that her first generation
iWatch contained every feature a user could want---save the one
guaranteed to improve the lives of at least half the population by
monitoring a menstrual cycle. Clearly there hadn't been enough women on
the team that developed the device, she said, issuing a now-familiar
call for the coding net to be cast wider. Top of her suggestions for
transforming code culture was to introduce all kids to programming from
the earliest possible age, as young as three---an idea repeated many
times and with escalating urgency since. See "Dame Stephanie Shirley:
\'we were part of a crusade to get women into business,'" *The
Guardian*, 8 March, 2017.

<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2017/mar/08/dame-stephanie-shirley-flexible-remote-working-glass-ceiling>

399 --- 'most continental European educators introduce these skills
later than is conventional in the Anglosphere': for a good digest of
this issue see "Are We Teaching Children to Read Too Early?," Teachers
College Press, Teachers College, Columbia University.

<https://www.tcpress.com/blog/literacy-in-early-childhood/>

400 --- 'You are preparing them to write code': Having raised two
children, I couldn't agree more with Morgan when he adds: "But you are
not only teaching them that. You're teaching them the world is full of
interesting things to discover. You're showing them how to be passionate
and look for that ephemeral sense of quality in everything they do. The
best part is that even if they don't become coders---most shouldn't and
won't---the same skills can be used in nearly any career, in every
hobby, in every life. When we force kids to learn syntax, we reinforce
the idea that if something is not a blatantly employable skill, it's not
valuable."

401 --- 'many Silicon Valley tech parents . . . treat code, screens,
technology in general with utmost caution': "Silicon Valley parents
banning tech for their kids", BBC News, 5 June 2019; "Silicon Valley
parents are raising their kids tech-free - and it should be a red flag,"
*Business Insider*, Feb 18, 2018; "Tablets out, imagination in: the
schools that shun technology," *The Guardian*, 2 December, 2015.

<https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-us-canada-48533999>

<https://www.businessinsider.com/silicon-valley-parents-raising-their-kids-tech-free-red-flag-2018-2?op=1>

<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/dec/02/schools-that-ban-tablets-traditional-education-silicon-valley-london>

401 --- 'Right now \[computer science is\] thought of . . . as basically
vocational training with Java': When I studied philosophy just before
the digital revolution imposed its hard fork on the world, the first two
semesters contained a mandatory module on Boolean logic. Many of my
classmates thought they\'d signed up for a humanities degree and were
outraged to be force-fed algebra: no matter, they had to pass the module
or they couldn\'t continue with the degree. In this way minds were
sharpened and broadened.

I have a dream that computer science departments mandate an introductory
module on the novels of Dostoyevsky, with the same conditions attached
as for logic in philosophy. Anyone who (for whatever neurologic reasons)
can\'t or can\'t be expected to complete such a course is offered an
alternative and sent on a different programming track (perhaps
specializing in debugging, for instance.) And when this is found to
produce better, more thoughtful and collaborative coders; to halt the
leach of good people from open source, then business schools adopt the
same model. Some students complain, while others express delight, but
any blowback is recognized as a small price to pay for the survival of
humankind. Would-be open source contributors are given the additional
pleasure of reading *Congratulations, By the Way*, George Saunders\'
short commencement speech to students at Syracuse University, which
makes them laugh and helps them be better teammates, while imparting
most of what they need to know to live a fulfilled and connected life.
In the director\'s cut of this fantasy, literature students are also
introduced to a programming language, but let\'s not get ahead of
ourselves. Bad poetry never destroyed a life. Bad code can. And does.

402 --- 'NASA announced that its next generation of Mars Rovers would
run open source software': "NASA's next lunar rover will run open-source
software," *MIT Technology Review*, April 12, 2021; "Meet the
Open-Source Software Powering NASA\'s Ingenuity Mars Helicopter," NASA
Mars Exploration Program website.

<https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/04/12/1022420/nasa-lunar-rover-viper-open-source-software/>

<https://www.nasa.gov/solar-system/meet-the-open-source-software-powering-nasas-ingenuity-mars-helicopter/>

402 --- 'a basic training certificate in collaborative communication':
The open source community may need to introduce an educational process
or basic certificate of qualification for new participants, setting out
what will be expected and allowing would-be contributors to learn and
demonstrate an ability to communicate constructively. Individuals to
whom this presents a special challenge could be offered help or
mentoring. For most of the time I\'ve been writing this book, Nicholas
has been designing a training program modeled on the grade-based system
using classical music teaching. One of the *CodeGrades* innovations
closest to his heart is training in productive collaboration with
others.

<https://www.codegrades.com/>

402 --- 'NASA announced that its next generation of Mars Rovers would
run open-source software': see "NASA's next lunar rover will run
open-source software: The mission could turn the space industry on to
less expensive, more accessible technologies," April 12, 2021, *MIT
Technology Review* \[
<https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/04/12/1022420/nasa-lunar-rover-viper-open-source-software/>
\]

![viper rover](media/image1.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.65625in"}An
artist\'s rendering of VIPER on the moon, courtesy NASA

403 --- 'Psychologists say humans are springloaded to linger on
negatives because focus on danger keeps us safe': "Our Brain\'s Negative
Bias: Why our brains are more highly attuned to negative news,"
*Psychology Today*, June 20, 2003

<https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/articles/200306/our-brains-negative-bias>

403 --- 'Uber's criminality and cant exceeded even the direst imaginings
of critics': see "The Uber whistleblower: I'm exposing a system that
sold people a lie,'" *The Guardian*, 11 July 2022.

<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2022/jul/11/uber-files-whistleblower-lobbyist-mark-macgann>

403 --- 'AI pricing algorithms are learning to collude': *MIT Technology
Review* podcast, October 27, 2021, "How Pricing Algorithms Learn to
Collude: AI could learn to form cartels in an effort to maximize
profits"

<https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/10/27/1038835/podcast-how-pricing-algorithms-learn-to-collude/>

403 --- 'TikTok algorithms bombard young men with misogynistic posts':
"How TikTok bombards young men with misogynistic videos," *The
Guardian*, 6 August, 2022

<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/aug/06/revealed-how-tiktok-bombards-young-men-with-misogynistic-videos-andrew-tate>

403 --- 'the Chinese government using its equivalent of Microsoft 365 to
censor books before they've even left their authors' laptops': "A
million-word novel got censored before it was even shared. Now Chinese
users want answers." *MIT Technology Review*, July 15, 2022

<https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/07/15/1056042/chinese-novel-censored-before-shared/>

403 --- 'an ambitious French plan to democratize Large Language Model
"AI"': "Inside a radical new project to democratize AI," *MIT Technology
Review*, July 12, 2022.

<https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/07/12/1055817/inside-a-radical-new-project-to-democratize-ai/>

403 --- 'a virtual reality program called "Isness-D"': "VR is as good as
psychedelics at helping people reach transcendence," *MIT Technology
Review*, August 8, 2022; "Psychedelics are having a moment and women
could be the ones to benefit," *MIT Technology Review*, August 10, 2022

<https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/08/06/1056727/vr-virtual-reality-psychedelics-transcendence/>

<https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/08/10/1057146/psychedelics-scentific-research-women/>

404 --- 'a Machine Learning-propelled medical revolution in diagnosis,
treatment and drug design': see "The next healthcare revolution will
have AI at its center," *TechCrunch*, September 20, 2021; "Rewriting
what we thought was possible in biotech," *MIT Technology Review*, June
28, 2022; "Exclusive: NHS to use AI to identify people at higher risk of
hepatitis C," *Nursing in Practice*, 3 August, 2022. Not everyone buys
this enthusiasm, though, as detailed in "The skeptic: What precision
medicine revolution?: The benefits of genomic drugs are exaggerated,
hurting patients and the practice of medicine, says one high-profile
oncologist," *MIT Technology Review*, October 23, 2018 and "Medicine's
Machine Learning Problem: As Big Data tools reshape health care, biased
datasets and unaccountable algorithms threaten to further disempower
patients," *Boston Review*, January 4, 2021

<https://techcrunch.com/2021/09/20/the-next-healthcare-revolution-will-have-ai-at-its-center/>

<https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/06/28/1054260/2022-innovators-biotechnology/?utm_source=LinkedIn&utm_campaign=site_visitor.unpaid.engagement&utm_medium=tr_social>

<https://www.nursinginpractice.com/latest-news/nhse-to-use-ai-to-identify-patients-at-risk-of-hepatitis-c/>

<https://www.technologyreview.com/2018/10/23/139408/the-skeptic-what-precision-medicine-revolution/>

<https://www.bostonreview.net/articles/rachel-thomas-medicines-machine-learning-problem/>

404 --- 'the conservative political analyst and academic Yuval Levin has
opened a discussion on what to do about it': "It Was a Mistake to Let
Kids Onto Social Media Sites. Here's What to Do Now," *New York Times*,
August 5, 2022

\[LINK

404 --- 'Big Tech companies who recognize their power and try to use it
well, like Slack and Salesforce': nuanced (and not uncritical)
discussions of their success in this regard at: "What It's Like to Work
at Slack", *Time*, October 29, 2015 and "The Gospel of Wealth According
to Marc Benioff: The Salesforce founder has donated a fortune to right
capitalism\'s wrongs, and he thinks his fellow billionaires should too.
Why can\'t we just be grateful?," *Wired*, December 11, 2019.

<https://www.nytimes.com/2022/08/05/opinion/social-media-parents-children.html>

<https://www.wired.com/story/gospel-of-wealth-according-to-marc-benioff/>
