[Ch16 --]{.underline} Notes

321 --- \'if reality is a giant data-processing mechanism or algorithmic
soup' -- for a statement of this idea, try "The Universe Is a Machine
That Keeps Learning, Scientists Say: Basically, we live in one giant
algorithm," *Popular Mechanics*, April 4, 2021. See also the theory of
quantum holography, as espoused by the late Apollo moonwalker Dr. Edgar
Mitchell: "Is Our Universe a Hologram? Physicists Debate Famous Idea on
Its 25th Anniversary", *Scientific American*, March 1, 2023.

[]:https://www.popularmechanics.com/science/a36112655/universe-is-self-learning-algorithm/>
[]:https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/is-our-universe-a-hologram-physicists-debate-famous-idea-on-its-25th-anniversary1/>

322==Among an unusually racially diverse and gender-balanced
international crowd are some colorful individuals==With some
commensurately surprising skill sets. One participant in our music
session, Zan McQuade, turned out work for O'Reilly Media, but have a
sideline translating Latvian fiction into English, while playing piano
to a high level and being the drummer in an all-woman Todd Rundgren
covers bands. This kind of thing was not unusual.

322==a young CS professor . . . insists on calling our discussion
"AI IS A LIE!"' -- when Nicholas sees this, he laughs and reveals that
he tells colleagues "AI" is an acronym for "PR."

324 --- \'Fake it till you make it, in other words\==The consolation is
that this debate isn\'t new to the world, or even computing. I\'ve
brought Dijkstra\'s *Selected Writings* to camp and now find myself
quoting from it.

"We are in the midst of an exciting process of clarification, of
improvement of our understanding of the true nature of the programming
task and its intrinsic difficulties,\" the master writes. \"A few notes
of warning, however, are not out of place, because, to my great regret,
already now progress is being oversold. Simple souls have been made to
believe that we have a retail shop in Philosopher's Stones that, by
magic, will cure all diseases; in a few years' time it will, of course,
become apparent that there are still a few diseases uncured and then the
same simple souls will denounce us as quacks."

If I learnt one thing at Foo Camp, it's that---as elsewhere in
life---tech specifics change all the time, while fundamentals remain
pretty constant. Plus Ã§a change, we might say: the more it changes, the
more it stays the same. Reassuring? Let's reconvene on that one in a
decade or so.

324==academic institutions whose priorities increasingly reflect the
Google grants underlying them\==as reported in *Wired*, ibid.. The *FT*
reporter Rana Foroohar, in her book *Don\'t Be Evil: The Case Against
Big Tech*, notes that Google refers to the process of controlling
research and reporting as \"social and intellectual capture\". For a
digest of Foroohar's case, see "Don't Be Evil: The Case Against Big Tech
by Rana Foroohar review --- break up the giants", *The Times* (UK),
October 31, 2019.

[]:https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/don-t-be-evil-the-case-against-big-tech-by-rana-foroohar-review-break-up-the-giants-gwrjmwcfw>

325==Learning algorithms make it possible . . . to predict the
outcome of processes . . . without doing the science to understand *why*
they behave as they do==an interesting and nuanced discussion of this
development may be found in "How Artificial Intelligence Is Changing
Science", *Quanta*, March 11, 2019. \[LINK
[]:https://sites.pitt.edu/~jdnorton/teaching/Phil_Sci_Core/Phil_Sci_Core_2022/docs/ML_revolution/Quanta_AI_Change_Science_2019.pdf>

325==software of such luminosity that it puts me in mind of the
Victorian essayist Walter Pater's dictum that "All art constantly
aspires towards the condition of music"==I\'ve referenced this
condition twice, so it\'s time to explain. The Victorian literary critic
Walter Pater famously declared that all art aspires to the condition of
music, on the understanding that this aspiration is seldom if ever
realized, so I don\'t borrow his dictum lightly here.

325==the way we compute is changing\==As George Dyson notes in
*Analogia*, early computers adopted rigid programming techniques to
compensate for unreliable analog hardware. But digital hardware is now
reliable to a degree Turing and von Neumann could scarcely have
imagined, able to deliver trillions of CPU cycles without mishap,
opening the door to more flexible, probabilistic approaches to software
as embodied in Machine Learning (where data in effect becomes the code).
Andrej Karpathy, Senior Director of AI at Tesla, has referred to this
new approach to programming as \"Software 2.0.\" Important to remember
is that the underlying substrate remains digital and binary and relies
on abstraction. \"Software 2.0\" mimics the analog approach of nature
but is not of it.

326==shocking sexual misconduct==*New York Times*, October 25,
2018, "How Google Protected Andy Rubin, the 'Father of Android'"
[]:https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/25/technology/google-sexual-harassment-andy-rubin.html>

327==awareness that its bottom line intersects others==Gebru was
not alone within the Google empire. Their London-based DeepMind machin
learning division are known to have insisted their technology should
never be used for military or surveillance purposes upon being bought by
the Silicon Valley giant, even if later attempts for formalize and
expand this agreement appear to have been called off by Google\'s parent
company Alphabet. Writing in the *Wall Street Journal* on May 21, 2021
(\"Google Unit DeepMind Tried---and Failed---to Win AI Autonomy From
Parent\" \[LINK
[]:https://www.wsj.com/articles/google-unit-deepmind-triedand-failedto-win-ai-autonomy-from-parent-11621592951>
\]), author Parmy Olsen characterized Alphabet\'s withdrawal as \"the
latest example of how Google and other tech giants are trying to
strengthen their control over the study and advancement of artificial
intelligence.\"

327==Timnit Gebru was an AI ethicist . . . who chose her beat after
early exposure to algorithmic biases==Prior to joining and leaving
Google, Timnit Gebru was best known for her part in an important 2018
study demonstrating that where facial recognition \"AI\" worked almost
flawlessly for white men, it misidentified dark-skinned women up to 35%
of the time. See *MIT News*, "Study finds gender and skin-type bias in
commercial artificial-intelligence systems," 11 February, 2018. Emails
at the heart of the controversy surrounding Gebru\'s resignation,
written by her and Google\'s head of AI, Jeff Dean, may be found at
*Platformer*, "The withering email that got an ethical AI researcher
fired at Google," 3 December, 2020.

LINK
[]:https://news.mit.edu/2018/study-finds-gender-skin-type-bias-artificial-intelligence-systems-0212>

[]:https://www.platformer.news/the-withering-email-that-got-an-ethical/>

328==English contains dozens of terms for states of inebriation==
for the record, there's

basted, wasted, hammered, smashed, minced, mashed, trashed, blasted,
pie-eyed, plastered, cockeyed, bladdered, stewed, reeking, minging,
soused, sozzled, squiffy, totalled, blitzed, trolleyed, blotto, newted,
munted, fecked, bombed, bat faced, fannied, wellied, mullered, banjaxed,
bevvied, legless, ruined, wiped, pantsed, cabbaged, badgered, paggered,
binned, potted, greased, leathered, blethered, rendered, rinsed, goosed,
clobbered, pickled, toasted, ripped, roasted, sauced, sloshed, juiced,
kebabbed, rat-arsed, tipsy, slaughtered, steamboats, skunked, guttered,
Magooed, lit, crocked, cooked, blootered, legless, shit canned,
shitfaced, bog faced, strung out, stonking, reakin', poleaxed,
scuttered, flaming, merry, spannered, tramlined, rubbered, lashed,
frazzled, fermented, loaded, howlin' (drunk), steamin' (drunk),
screamin' (drunk), drunk as a skunk, drunk as a fish, drunk as a bishop,
drunk as a lord, pissed as a judge, pissed as a fart, pissed as a newt,
pissed as a tart, on the turps, wrecked, steaming, twatted, stinking,
rotten, tiddly, pished, tight, tipsy, half cut, tired and emotional,
three sheets to the wind, well oiled, highly lubricated, well refreshed,
off (your) face, off (your) head, off (your) trolley, off (your) tits,
oot yer tree (Scotland), lagered up, fucked up, gone, messy, wankered,
bolloxed, tit-faced, trousered, stocious, mangled, marinated, battered,
buggered, wrote off, tanked up, crapulous, fermented, in the bag, under
the influence, wired to the moon, (utterly) carparked, up to the gills,
on the sauce, one over the eight, comfortably numb, chemically altered,
Brahms & Liszt (pissed), Schindler's (List---pissed) etc. etc. etc . . .
etc.

328=="empathy" is a recent acquisition, borrowed from the more
conceptually expressive German==see Susan Lanzoni, *Empathy: A
History*.

328==Sean Parker would duly later regret the way his company had
harnessed "a vulnerability in human psychology"==*The Guardian*, 9
November, 2019, "Ex-Facebook president Sean Parker: site made to exploit
human \'vulnerability: Site's founding president, who became a
billionaire thanks to the company, says: 'God only knows what it's doing
to our children's brains." \[LINK
[]:https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/nov/09/facebook-sean-parker-vulnerability-brain-psychology>

329 --- \'a Georgetown University study showing that GPT-3\'s efficiency
improved in proportion to the extremity of input\' - the Center for
Security and Emerging Technology at Georgetown University, \"Truth, Lies
and Automation: How Language Models Could Change Disinformation\", May
2021. \[LINK
[]:https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/truth-lies-and-automation/>

329==another senior employee who noted similar interference with a
different paper on LLMs==see the excellent \"What Really Happened When
Google Ousted Timnit Gebru,\" by Tom Simonite, *Wired*, 8 June, 2021.
\[LINK
[]:https://www.wired.com/story/google-timnit-gebru-ai-what-really-happened/>

329==purveyors of misinformation, disinformation, propaganda and
spam had been gifted a mighty new tool==see "The Coming Age of
AI-Powered Propaganda: How to Defend Against Supercharged
Disinformation," *Foreign Affairs*, April 7, 2023; "Brace Yourself for a
Tidal Wave of ChatGPT Email Scam: Thanks to large language models, a
single scammer can run hundreds or thousands of cons in parallel, night
and day, in every language under the sun," *Wired*, April 4, 2023; "How
unbelievably realistic fake images could take over the internet: AI
image generators like DALL-E and Midjourney are getting better and
better at fooling us," *Vox*, March 30, 2023; "We are hurtling toward a
glitchy, spammy, scammy, AI-powered internet: Large language models are
full of security vulnerabilities, yet they're being embedded into tech
products on a vast scale," *MIT Technology Review*, April 4, 2023; "The
Hacking of ChatGPT Is Just Getting Started," *MIT Technology Review*,
April 13, 2023.

\[LINK

[]:https://www.foreignaffairs.com/united-states/coming-age-ai-powered-propaganda>

[]:https://www.wired.com/story/large-language-model-phishing-scams/>

[]:https://www.vox.com/technology/2023/3/30/23662292/ai-image-dalle-openai-midjourney-pope-jacket>

[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/04/04/1070938/we-are-hurtling-toward-a-glitchy-spammy-scammy-ai-powered-internet/>

[]:https://www.wired.com/story/chatgpt-jailbreak-generative-ai-hacking/>

329==research groups are still rejecting the company\'s funding==
see "Inside the Fight to Reclaim AI from Big Tech\'s Control,\" by Karen
Hao, *MIT Technology Review*, 14 June, 2021.

[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/06/14/1026148/ai-big-tech-timnit-gebru-paper-ethics/>

329==Few imagined Gebru would be fired==this transpired not to be
an isolated incident. See "Big tech companies cut AI ethics staff,
raising safety concerns," *Financial Times*, March 29, 2023

[]:https://www.ft.com/content/26372287-6fb3-457b-9e9c-f722027f36b3>

330==persistent public questions about whether ChatGPT and its
"generative AI" successors . . . were conscious==Indeed, a Google
engineer publicly claimed that his "AI" had crossed the threshold to
consciousness. It hadn't, and the engineer was put on administrative
leave. For a useful discussion of the episode and its implications, see
"Google's AI Is Something Even Stranger Than Conscious: Machine
sentience is overrated," *The Atlantic*, June 19, 2022. \[LINK
[]:https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2022/06/google-palm-ai-artificial-consciousness/661329/>

330==intellectual property and copyright were suddenly more
fraught==see "This artist is dominating AI-generated art. And he's not
happy about it," *MIT Technology Review*, September 16, 2022. \[LINK
[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/09/16/1059598/this-artist-is-dominating-ai-generated-art-and-hes-not-happy-about-it/>

330==a fresh range of white-collar jobs--- including some forms of
coding---were newly threatened==see "Is AI Coming for Coders First?,"
*New York magazine*, March 31, 2023; "A.I. Is Coming for Lawyers,
Again," *New York Times*, 10 April, 2023; "ChatGPT is about to
revolutionize the economy. We need to decide what that looks like," *MIT
Technology Review*, March 25, 2023; *Power and Progress: Our 1000-Year
Struggle Over Technology & Prosperity*, by Daron Acemoglu and Simon
Johnson. The authors of the latter warn that: "Society and its powerful
gatekeepers need to stop being mesmerized by tech billionaires and their
agenda . . . One does not need to be an AI expert to have a say about
the direction of progress and the future of our society forged by these
technologies . . . We are heading toward greater inequality not
inevitably but because of faulty choices about who has power in society
and the direction of technology . . . In fact, UBI \[Universal Basic
Income\] fully buys into the vision of the business and tech elite that
they are the enlightened, talented people who should generously finance
the rest." A view bolstered by the nonprofit AI Now's 2023 annual
report, "Confronting Tech Power."

[]:https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2023/03/is-ai-coming-for-coders-first.html>

[]:https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/10/technology/ai-is-coming-for-lawyers-again.html>

[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/03/25/1070275/chatgpt-revolutionize-economy-decide-what-looks-like/>

[]:https://search.issuelab.org/resource/ai-now-institute-2023-landscape-confronting-tech-power.html>

330==mature experts had their work cut out trying to explain the
truth": Gary Marcus was suddenly everywhere trying to preach sanity. See
"An A.I. Expert Answers A.I. Questions from Twitter."

\[LINK

[]:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Puo3VkPkNZ4>

330==Educators had be- gun to see ways the bots could be helpful==
see "ChatGPT is going to change education, not destroy it: The narrative
around cheating students doesn't tell the whole story. Meet the teachers
who think generative AI could actually make learning better," *MIT
Technology Review*, April 6, 2023. Also "How AI is helping historians
better understand our past: The historians of tomorrow are using
computer science to analyze how people lived centuries ago," *MIT
Technology Review*, April 11, 2023.

[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/04/06/1071059/chatgpt-change-not-destroy-education-openai/>

[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/04/11/1071104/ai-helping-historians-analyze-past/>

330==an impassioned open letter signed by an improbably broad range
of names in tech . . . called for a six-month moratorium on new LLM
releases==And some wanted to go further, as per "Pausing AI
Developments Isn't Enough. We Need to Shut it All Down," *Time*, March
29, 2023, by Eliezer Yudkowsky, lead researcher at the Machine
Intelligence Research Unit.

[]:https://time.com/6266923/ai-eliezer-yudkowsky-open-letter-not-enough/>

330==Instead, an "AI" goldrush began==OpenAI, which had previously
been a nonprofit aimed at ensuring the safety of "AI," accepted billions
in investment from Microsoft and converted to for-profit status. A week
after calling for a moratorium, Elon Musk, in the kind of capricious
*volte face* we would grow used to, announced the creation of his own
"AI" startup, X.AI. Microsoft laid off an AI ethics team, as described
in "Microsoft lays off team responsible for AI ethics," *TechRadar*,
March 14, 2023.

[]:https://www.techradar.com/news/microsoft-lays-off-team-responsible-for-ai-ethics>

330==as I write . . . browser tabs on my laptop contain articles on
. . . \' :

\"Google Team That Keeps Services Online Rocked by Mental Health
Crisis,\" *Bloomberg*, Jan 20, 2022,

[]:https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2022-01-20/inside-google-s-brewing-mental-health-crisis-claims-of-toxic-work-environment>

\"Corporations send large donations to GOP group behind abortion bans
and voter suppression,\" *Popular Information*, Feb 2, 2022

[]:https://popular.info/p/corporations-send-large-donations?token=eyJ1c2VyX2lkIjo1ODQxMDA1LCJwb3N0X2lkIjo0ODA3NTAxMywiXyI6IlkxZ25zIiwiaWF0IjoxNjQzODQ0NjYwLCJleHAiOjE2NDM4NDgyNjAsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0xNjY0Iiwic3ViIjoicG9zdC1yZWFjdGlvbiJ9.LwiPN4Z3PSSlX_wvSzQx4lnO8FKPg9EeHSkygCaLpOI>

\"Seven major corporations pledge not to support GOP objectors in
2022,\" January 4, 2022

[]:https://popular.info/p/seven-major-corporations-pledge-not?token=eyJ1c2VyX2lkIjo1ODQxMDA1LCJwb3N0X2lkIjo0NjU0Nzc2NiwiXyI6IlkxZ25zIiwiaWF0IjoxNjQzODQ1MTE3LCJleHAiOjE2NDM4NDg3MTcsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0xNjY0Iiwic3ViIjoicG9zdC1yZWFjdGlvbiJ9.MkraTrozBMtIbEylPMwWemjrwD9bZVDON8IqkzecktI>

330==instead, an "AI" goldrush began==The British deep learning
godhead Geoffrey Hinton would be perturbed enough by the sudden leap
forward to resign from Google so he could make his fears public. "I want
to talk about AI safety issues without having to worry about how it
interacts with Google's business. As long as I'm paid by Google, I can't
do that," he told *MIT Technology Review* (May 2, 2023, "Geoffrey Hinton
tells us why he's now scared of the tech he helped build: 'I have
suddenly switched my views on whether these things are going to be more
intelligent than us.'")

[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/05/02/1072528/geoffrey-hinton-google-why-scared-ai/>

331 --- \'\[Google\'s\] embrace of the far-right demi-monde built by the
Machievellian industrialists, the Koch Brothers\==\"Google and the Koch
Network: A Troubling Alliance of Convenience,\" *Tech Transparency
Project*, December 20, 2019

[]:https://www.techtransparencyproject.org/articles/google-and-koch-network-troubling-alliance-of-convenience>

331 --- \'the company\'s funding of global misinformation\==from \"How
Facebook and Google fund global misinformation,\" *MIT Technology
Review*, November 20, 2021: \"The tech giants are paying millions of
dollars to the operators of clickbait pages, bankrolling the
deterioration of information ecosystems around the world.\"
[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/11/20/1039076/facebook-google-disinformation-clickbait/>

331 --- \'a secret agreement, codenamed \"Jedi Blue\"\==reported well
here:
[]:https://twitter.com/patrickmcgee_/status/1451619916994396164?s=21&utm_source=Tortoise+Members&utm_campaign=018fad0aa8-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2021_10_27_08_20&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_efeb5ec230-018fad0aa8-139315740&mc_cid=018fad0aa8&mc_eid=6272898850>

331==a Dutch company called ASML==an excellent introduction to this
remarkable company, its achievements and ongoing challenges, was run by
the *Financial Times* on June 1 2023, as \"The big question of how small
chips can get.\" The explanation of how its extreme ultraviolet
photolithography machines work is mindboggling. Alone in its ability to
produce new chips to keep Moore\'s Law afloat, ASML\'s chief executive,
Peter Wennink, cites their \"biggest competitor\" as the expectation of
continuous progress, according to the *FT*. NB: the *FT* has a paywall
but often runs cheap trials, worth paying to gain access to this piece.

[]:https://www.ft.com/content/fbf52ede-e1a9-4797-9e52-3f80a7d855d9>

332 --- \'Rather than ersatz religion, the sociologist Sherry Turkle
thought she saw the hallmarks of ideology among AI activist-researchers
she studied==Sherry Turkle, *The Second Self: Computers and the Human
Spirit*.

332 --- \'anthropologist Robert Geraci saw Kurzweil and the
Singularitarians . . . as logical heirs to apocalyptic Christian
sects\==detailed in Robert M. Geraci, *Apocalyptic AI: Visions of
Heaven in Robotics, Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality*.

332==Kurzweil is far from alone among technologists in looking
forward to the future he describes==When I spoke to the robotics
researcher Hans Moravec, then at MIT, two decades ago, he considered
merging with our machines to be "our most rational, mature future." But
where Moravec\'s vision cleaved to the Engelbartian notion of
incremental "augmentation," Kurzweil\'s was abrupt, unnegotiable---and
irreversible.

333==If Foer is right . . . then Timnit Gebru was fired because she
threatened Google's hidden core mission==A decent early summary of how
the large language model works and why it may have rung alarm bells for
Timnit Gebru and others---despite Google\'s strong commitment to
it---may be found in "How Large Language Models Will Transform Science,
Society, and AI," published by Stanford University's HAI institute, 5
February, 2021. The piece, by Alex Tamkin and Deep Ganguli, begins: \"
In July 2020, OpenAI unveiled GPT-3, a language model that was easily
the largest known at the time. Put simply, GPT-3 is trained to predict
the next word in a sentence, much like how a text message autocomplete
feature works. However, model developers and early users demonstrated
that it had surprising capabilities, like the ability to write
convincing essays, create charts and websites from text descriptions,
generate computer code, and more --- all with limited to no supervision.
The model also has shortcomings. For example, it can generate racist,
sexist, and bigoted text, as well as superficially plausible content
that, upon further inspection, is factually inaccurate, undesirable, or
unpredictable.\" The problem, in other words, is the same as for all
other current \"AI\": it\'s not intelligent, it just *simulates*
intelligence. It doesn\'t take much imagination to see how such an
equation might be---and is being---abused."

[]:https://hai.stanford.edu/news/how-large-language-models-will-transform-science-society-and-ai>

333 --- \'Larry Page personally brought Ray Kurzweil to Google as
director of engineering==SingularityHub, March 19, 2013

[]:https://singularityhub.com/2013/03/19/exclusive-interview-ray-kurzweil-discusses-his-first-two-months-at-google/>

334==others rocked slime mold==slime molds are truly remarkable
organisms. Look at the photos Barry Webb took and try not to fall in
love with them \[
[]:https://www.barrywebbimages.co.uk/Images/Macro/Slime-Moulds-Myxomycetes/i-t7Tjq93/A>
. Their confounding ability to sense the shortest route between two
points in a maze with no trial and error is only the beginning. Dr Iain
McGilchrist points out that if you cut a way a piece of slime mold that
has already solved a maze, the new piece retains the memory of how to do
it. Again, at writing no one knows how.

334==biology uses a template system of address, instructing \"do
THIS with the next copy of THAT you encounter\' -- George Dyson is
especially good on this in *Turing\'s Cathedral* and the more recent
*Analogia: The Emergence of Technology Beyond Human Control*. In the
former, he writes that \"This ability to take general, organized
advantage of local, haphazard processes is the ability that (so far) has
distinguished information processing in living organisms from
information processing by digital computers . . . Our understanding of
life has deepened with our increasing knowledge of the workings of
complex molecular machines, while our understanding of technology is
diminished as machines approach the complexity of living things.\"

334==I visited leaders of a well-funded EU-coordinated program of
research into UC==see "Break the Mould" by Andrew Smith, *The Sunday
Times*, March 29, 2015. *The* (London) *Times* has a paywall, but (as I
write) a trial subscription is available for Â£1.

\[LINK []:https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/break-the-mould-6hxng9pvh2g>

334==Others rocked slime mold' -- Hard as it may be to believe,
slime mold also turns out to be extraordinarily beautiful up close. See
what I mean thanks to the amazing photography of Barry Webb. \[LINK
[]:https://www.barrywebbimages.co.uk/Images/Macro/Slime-Moulds-Myxomycetes>

334==one researcher showed me how two chemicals, when mixed, formed
themselves into exquisitely beautiful, perfectly distributed patterns==
This was at the University of the West of England in Bristol. For years
I kept the petri dishes containing these perfectly distributed patterns,
made possible because in nature nothing is waiting for instructions:
every element acts in concert, simultaneously. In essence, computers are
fast but linear, where biology is slow but distributed---which may yet
provide a clue to the future of computing (not least because we have a
vast amount to learn from nature yet). Dyson is especially good on this
distinction, both in *Turing's Cathedral* (try pages 274-6 to start) and
the delightful memoir-cum-philosophical treatise, *Analogia*.

335==for this reason Alan Turing\'s colleague Jack Good preferred to
call analog computing "continuous computing"' in Dyson, ibid., "analog
computers are stupidly named; they should be named continuous
computers."

335 --- \'Turing believed that a perfectly predictable and infallible
machine could not be intelligent.\' -- Dyson, ibid. \"In other words
then, if a machine is expected to be infallible, it cannot also be
intelligent.\"

335 --- \'The chief driver of intelligence for \[Turing\] was curiosity,
so a true AI would need to make mistakes==from Dyson again: \"'What we
want is a machine that can learn from experience,' Turing wrote. 'The
possibility of letting the machine alter its own instructions provides
the mechanism for this.' Jack Good added that, 'The ultra-intelligent
machine . . . is the machine that believes people cannot think.'"

335 --- \'a Dutch company called ASML has spent a reported nine billion
dollars finding a way to continue cramming more transistors into chips\'
-- *MIT Technology Review*, October 27, 2021, \"Inside the Machine that
Saved Moore\'s Law.\" Experimentation did continue, though. In March,
2023, *New Scientist* reported on a simple computer having been built
from mouse brain cells: "80,000 mouse brain cells used to build a living
computer: Tens of thousands of living brain cells have been used to
build a simple computer that can recognise patterns of light and
electricity. It could eventually be used in robotics.", 16 March, 2023.

[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/10/27/1037118/moores-law-computer-chips/>

[]:https://www.newscientist.com/article/2363095-80000-mouse-brain-cells-used-to-build-a-living-computer/>

336 --- \'He has already built a first working chemical computer: see
his paper \"Chemputation and the Standardization of Chemical
Informatics\"

[]:https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacsau.1c00303>

336==efforts to compute using vibration, voltage, lazers and light==
see "How to Make the Universe Think for Us: Physicists are building
neural networks out of vibrations, voltages and lasers, arguing that the
future of computing lies in exploiting the universe's complex physical
behaviors," *Quanta*, May 31, 2022

https://www.quantamagazine.org/how-to-make-the-universe-think-for-us-20220531/

336==chapter one of an unfinished manuscript the great scientist
left behind was entitled \"Turing!\", while chapter two was \"Not
Turing!\"\==in 1948 von Neumann mused that \"If the only demerit of the
digital expansion system were its greater logical complexity, nature
would not, for this reason alone, have rejected it.\" According to
George Dyson in *Turing\'s Cathedral* \"template-based addressing was a
key element of von Neumann\'s overall plan.\" As well it might have
been. In a 2003 talk called "Coding from Scratch," Jaron Lanier lamented
the way hardware was constantly improving while software grew ever more
brittle and hard to manage, until computerists had ceased to imagine it
could be otherwise. \"Some things in the foundation of computer science
are fundamentally askew,\" he said. \"If you make a small change to a
program, it can result in an enormous change in what the program does.
If nature worked that way, the universe would crash all the time."
Likewise the brain, which appears to function probabilistically, being
about patterns rather than rules. For this reason natural systems are
\"homeostatic,\" i.e. tending to default to their original state when
attacked or agitated.

337==most accounts trace the modern pursuit of AI to 1956==a good
summary in *MIT Technology Review*, October 15, 2020, "Artificial
general intelligence: Are we close, and does it even make sense to try?"

[]:https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/10/15/1010461/artificial-general-intelligence-robots-ai-agi-deepmind-google-openai/>

338==language is not essential to complex thought==see "Fluid
intelligence is supported by the multiple-demand system not the language
system," in *Nature Human Behaviour*, 29 January, 2018, in which a team
including cognitive scientists from Harvard and Cambridge universities
concluded: " . . . building on prior work that has linked fluid
intelligence with frontal and parietal cortices, our paper shows that
fluid intelligence is specifically associated with the domain-general MD
system and not the language system. While language may still be
important in the development of intellect, these results undermine
claims that language is at the core of adult reasoning abilities."
[]:https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-017-0282-3>

338==Gary Marcus points out that the word "deep" . . . has become a
marketing concept==Readers may by this stage wonder why Gary Marcus is
involved in "AI", given his fears for the current state of it. In fact,
he considers that it could be of game-changingly powerful benefit to
humanity in understanding and interpreting biology, especially in
relation to fields like healthcare, eldercare, unravelling the mysteries
of the brain, understanding conditions like Alzheimer's and helping to
meet the challenges of climate change. He wants to see it applied in
these ways, while protecting the human environment from its risks.

339==even bees are now being viewed with respect and awe==and
rightly so. For a summation of extraordinary new discoveries in relation
to bees, see *The Guardian*, 16 July, 2022, "'Bees are really highly
intelligent==the insect IQ tests causing a buzz among scientists." The
piece's intro explains what's inside, saying "We all know these busy
insects are good for crops and biodiversity, but proof is emerging that
they are also clever, sentient and unique beings." Perhaps the most
surprising revelation is that bees, like crows, can recognize human
faces and distinguish people from each other.

[]:https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/jul/16/bees-are-really-highly-intelligent-the-insect-iq-tests-causing-a-buzz-among-scientists>

339==each of a neuron\'s dendrites . . . may *in themselves* be
carrying out processing tasks beyond the capabilities of any current
electrical system\' -- from *Nautilus*, \"Why AI Lags Behind the Human
Brain,\" issue 41, 2021: \"In fact, rather than thinking that the brain
works like a deep learning network, it might be more accurate to think
of many of the brain\'s 10 billion neurons as being deep networks, with
five to eight layers in each one. If true . . . simulating the brain at
a biological level will involve staggeringly large computational
resources.\"

[]:https://nautil.us/why-ai-lags-behind-the-human-brain-in-computational-power-238338/>

341 --- \'Larry Page\'s co-founder, Sergei Brin, had been "extremely
reluctant" to enter China==from the superb \"Three Years of Misery
Inside Google, the Happiest Company in Tech\", *Wired*, May 2020.

[]:https://www.wired.com/story/inside-google-three-years-misery-happiest-company-tech/>

341==Company engineers implored managers to drop Project Maven from
the start==from *Wired*, ibid.

341==after the Dragonfly fiasco they published a set of principles==
\"AI at Google: Our Principles\", Sundar Pichai, June 7, 2018. Two
months later, *The Intercept* broke news about Project Dragonfly,
immediately breaking one of the four key principles Pichai described
(ibid.).

346==an expanding population of individuals and families living out
of cars or trailers==*San Francisco Chronicle*, "S.F. homelessness
rises despite city spending hundreds of millions of dollars, new count
shows," May 16, 2024

https://www.sfchronicle.com/sf/article/sf-homeless-count-shows-increase-tents-vehicles-19446549.php

346==tech-inflated rents are so high and scant safety nets so porous
that almost anyone can fall through the cracks==see "Families need
\$200,000 to live comfortably in S.F.," *San Francisco Chronicle*, May
3, 2019

[]:https://www.sfchronicle.com/bayarea/article/Families-need-200-000-to-live-comfortably-in-S-F-6365829.php>

347==like eugenics, to which \[libertarianism\] bears more than a
passing conceptual resemblance==in the sense that both deny the
consideration of context. The key tenets of Libertarian thought, as
elucidated in the humorless, teeth-grindingly turgid and literal-minded
parables of the novelist Ayn Rand, are simple: (i) people exist as
individuals and are responsible for their own fates. Accordingly (ii)
they owe nothing to anyone else and are owed nothing in return.
Therefore (iii) governments have no right to interfere in the lives of
citizens beyond the protection of property rights and (iv) only \"The
Market\" can allocate value to people and things objectively, according
to \"merit\", without inviting tyranny. Yet the empirical context of
people\'s access to and relationship with The Market is abstracted away
under the guise of \"reason.\" Two things I had noticed with other Bay
Area Libertarians of my acquaintance were that a) for people who
trumpeted \"individual freedom\", they tended to have a lot of highly
prescriptive rules about how that \"freedom\" should be manifested, and
b) in fetishizing the individual as a theoretical construct, they wound
up denying individuals their individuality.

347==Libertarianism didn\'t originate in California but found a
fertile breeding ground here==Roger MacNamee explains the appeal of
Libertarianism to tech people very well in his book *Zucked*.

348==reason and emotion to work together in a healthy person---and
to be equally reliable commissioners of action==for more on this see
Malcolm Gladwell, *Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking*, or;
*How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain* by Lisa Feldman
Barrett; *Emotional: How Feelings Shape Our Thinking* by Leonard
Mlodinow. The excellent science journal *Nautilus* has also run a number
of articles on our new understanding of how emotion works (and is
related to what we think of as \"rationality\")---these are easily
searchable online.

348==Marvin Minsky pointed out that in a healthy person even anger
is rational==see Minsky, *The Emotion Machine: Commonsense Thinking,
Artificial Intelligence and the Future of the Human*

348==the "dark tetrad" of personality traits\==this information
from an email exchange with Professor Delroy Paulhus, one of the
conceptualizers of the Dark Triad and later Dark Tetrad. See his and
collaborators\' paper \"Screening for Dark Personalities: The Short Dark
Tetrad.\"
[]:https://www.scienceopen.com/document?vid=3df1459d-a55d-413e-b334-ebf7df524c8d>

349=="You know how sometimes you put your hand under running water
and for a brief moment you don't know if it is hot or cold?"==from
Hannah Gadsby's memoir, *Ten Steps to Nanette*.

350==the term still being used informally and by organizations like
the Asperger/Autism Network==There has also been a re-evaluation of the
term "Asperger's" after recent claims that Hans Asperger, the Austrian
doctor who identified and tried to help autistic children between the
world wars, collaborated with the ruling Nazis during World War II. For
the record, Steve Silberman tells me he is not convinced by the
evidence, and it looks a little shaky to me, too.

350==Increasingly, \"autistic\" and other atypical traits---and
almost everyone displays some of these==As an aside, extreme care needs
to be taken around the presumption of 'autistic traits', too. Discussing
this with a therapist friend, she points out that behavioral patterns
that look like expressions of autism can often have roots in childhood
experience, parenting etc., expressed as what she refers to as
"attachment styles," and have no connection to autism at all.

350==people with isolated autistic traits are far more likely than
average to have fully autistic offspring==for a summation of the
science here, see Simon Baron-Cohen's book *The Pattern Seekers: How
Autism Drives Human Invention*, specifically the chapter "Sex in the
Valley". Interestingly, Steve Silberman grew interested in autism after
being sent on a cruise for fans of the Perl programming language by
*Wired* magazine. He noticed not only that many attendees displayed
characteristics he associated with autism, but that the language's
founder, Larry Wall, had an autistic child; that many Valley movers and
shakers of his acquaintance also had autistic children. By the time he
wrote *NeuroTribes*, he had come to agree with most experts that any
perceived connection between Silicon Valley and autism was illusory.
Baron-Cohen's *The Pattern Seekers* suggests his original journalistic
instincts were not far off. Like neuroscience, this is an especially
fascinating and fast-moving area of study right now.

350==identifying autism with what he called "the extreme male
brain"==in *The Essential Difference: Men, Women and the Extreme Male
Brain*

350==by his assessment my own brain is highly "female"' -- How do I
know this? *The Essential Difference* contains a test. I suspect most
writers have what Baron-Cohen identified as "female brains."

350==Whether genderizing autism is helpful or not==I confess it
seems unhelpful to me on balance, a view the far more qualified (than
me) Silberman also shares.

351==while the CDC estimates that one in forty-four U.S. children
has autism, it is three to four times more common in boys than girls==
four to one according to the CDC and most others; nearer three to one
according to one study, "What Is the Male-to-Female Ratio in Autism
Spectrum Disorder? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" in *Journal of
the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry*, April 4, 2017
[]:https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28545751/>

351==these conditions may confer some advantages in coding tasks
like debugging==In *The Essential Difference*, Simon Baron-Cohen
describes a five-year-old from South London, diagnosed with Asperger\'s,
whose mother inadvertently discovered her son to have been memorizing
the serial numbers and expiry dates of tax discs on the windscreens of
hundreds of cars on their walk to school---along with which houses they
belonged to. This kind of ability is not uncommon to people with his
form of autism. It\'s easy to see how such abilities could be helpful to
tasks like debugging code (and to many others besides.) To prove the
point, a supervisor at Microsoft told Steve Silberman that "All of my
top debuggers have Asperger's Syndrome," going on to explain that "They
can hold hundreds of lines of code in their head as a visual image. They
look for the flaws in the pattern, and that's where the bugs are." No
more wily shift devils!

351==He also states flatly that "Autism is an empathy disorder"==
One needs to be careful with this. One of my very closest friends has an
autistic daughter who I've known since she was young and who I adore.
People are surprised that, because she feels safe with me, I can joke
with and even tease her playfully. She doesn't always understand the
content of the joke I'm making, but she can tell and enjoy that it's an
expression of affection. Doesn't this take a degree of empathy? The only
difference between interacting with her and more neurotypical young
people is that I'll monitor her more closely to make sure she feels safe
with our and other interactions and with the environment we're in. In
*The Essential Difference* Baron-Cohen explains that: "People with
autism are often the most loyal defenders of someone they perceive to be
suffering an injustice. In this way, they are not uncaring, or
cold-hearted psychopaths who want to hurt others. On the contrary, when
they discover that they have inadvertently hurt another person, perhaps
by saying something which has caused offense, they are usually shocked
and cannot understand why their actions have had this kind of impact.
They typically find it equally puzzling to know how to repair such a
hurt. Certainly, they do not set out to upset ethers. Broadly they have
difficulty making sense of and predicting another\'s feelings, thoughts,
and behavior."

353 --- \'a captivating New Yorker piece on hyperpolyglots\==*The New
Yorker*, August 27, 2018, \"The Mystery of People Who Speak Dozens of
Languages\"
[]:https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/09/03/the-mystery-of-people-who-speak-dozens-of-languages>

356==their methodology was different and may have been flawed==for
science geeks, Anna Ivanova explained the difference to me thus in an
email: "So, what \[the German team\] filtered out is the process of
\*reading the code\*: both their main task, predict the output, and
their control task, find syntactic bugs, involve reading code. Their key
analyses look at the difference between these two. In contrast, we
specifically focused on code reading in our study, and found that it's
bilateral. Problem-solving (predicting the output of the program once
you understand it) is also left-lateralized in our study. Whether your
bilateral maps in the Siegmund scan are due to proficiency or simply an
individual difference is hard to say :)"

358==his artful takedown of Steven Pinker in a reply to the
latter\'s essay==both are posted to *Channel McGilchrist*.
[]:https://channelmcgilchrist.com/>

360==animals with forward-facing eyes (like humans, apes, some
crows)==specifically, the highly intelligent New Caledonian Crows.
*AtlasObscura*, August 10, 2016

[]:https://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/these-crows-were-discovered-crafting-tools-to-reach-food>

362 --- \'the nematode caenorhabditis elegans, which has a nervous
system of only 302 neurons\==McGilchrist also tells me that if you cut
off the head of a nematode, it grows a new one. Remarkable enough,
perhaps---but the new head will have the memories of the old one. How?
As I write, it remains a mystery.

363==to a crow with a stick, everything looks like a grub=="2nd
Tool-Using Crow Species Found," *YahooNews*, 15 September, 2016

[]:https://sg.finance.yahoo.com/news/2nd-tool-using-crow-species-found-125321634.html>

365==*The Matter With Things* provides a slate of twenty differences
between the two hemispheres==A few of these are worth stating:

The left hemisphere is attuned to the close and familiar, \"what is
central and in the foreground\"; aims to narrow things down to certainty
and where contradiction or anomaly is introduced will often dismiss or
deny the discordant information rather than seek to form a synthesis,
because its preferred truth is binary and fixed; tends to see the world
as fragmentary and composed of *things*, with the whole being a sum of
parts and always reducible back to those parts---a perspective it
applies also to people (which is why prosody, facial expression, body
language have little or no purchase). It recognizes and is drawn to
fixity, stasis, the inanimate (\"machines and tools are alone coded in
the left hemisphere\"); is most at home with the explicit and therefore
struggles to recognize metaphor, myth, irony, humor, the poetic; if
offered a story with episodes jumbled, the left hemisphere will reorder
them according to similarity rather than narrative sense; it excels at
\"fine analytic sequencing\" and complex linguistic syntax, with a
larger vocabulary than the right hemisphere; is preternaturally
confident and optimistic, being disinclined to recognize its own
limitations; deals with simple rhythms, but little else of music,
although there is evidence that as musicians learn a piece and it
becomes grooved and familiar, the left hemisphere takes over.

In contrast (and complement) to the left hemisphere, the right is
attuned to the global; wants to understand the whole and how to relate
to it; is good at seeing and addressing what is new, unknown or unclear;
is attuned to ambiguity and able to accept and hold contradictory
information without rush to judgement; is inclined to see itself as
connected to or even part of what it observes; sees not discrete objects
but complex, irreducible relationships and processes, is drawn to the
implicit before explicit, the animate more than inanimate; is attracted
to and good at processing narrative; better understands the overall
import and significance of a proposition or statement than the more
syntactically sophisticated left hemisphere; processes most music; is
essential to empathy and theory of mind (the ability to see another\'s
point of view) and is in general terms more open to and expressive of
emotion; is more realistic and open to doubt and therefore tending to
pessimism. \"V.S. Ramachandran calls the right hemisphere the devil\'s
advocate,\" McGilchrist writes, \"since it acts as an anomaly detector,
on the lookout for what might be erroneously assumed by the left
hemisphere to be familiar. For the left hemisphere aims to narrow things
down to a certainty, where the right hemisphere opens them up into
possibility.

366==reams of academic study suggest psychopathy/sociopathy and
antisocial behaviors . . . to be associated with a \"hypofunctioning\"
(impaired) right hemisphere and/or \"hyperfunctioning\" (excessively
active) left==see \"An inter-hemispheric imbalance in the psychopath's
brain,\" *Personality and Individual Differences*, February 2011;
\"Cerebral Lateralization of Pro- and Anti-Social Tendencies,\" in
*Experimental Neurobiology*, 23 March, 2014. For more detail, peruse the
abundant \"references\" sections at the bottom of these papers.

[]:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S019188691100119X>

[]:https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24737936/>

367==Asperger's, which is thought to involve severe right
hemispheric impairment==see *Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders*, \"Right Hemisphere Dysfunction and Metaphor Comprehension in
Young Adults with Asperger Syndrome\"; *Journal of Child Neurology*,
\"Right Hemisphere Dysfunction in Asperger\'s Syndrome\"; *Psychology
Today*, October 5, 2013, \"The Left Hemisphere Hypothesis for Autism\"

[]:https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10803-009-0930-1>

[]:https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7594267/>

[]:https://www.psychologytoday.com/gb/blog/the-superhuman-mind/201310/the-left-hemisphere-hypothesis-autism>

367 --- \'even if environmental factors bear on how these imbalances
express\==see \"An inter-hemispheric imbalance in the psychopath's
brain,\" *Personality and Individual Differences*, July 2011, ibid.:
\"From a neurobiological perspective, it seems that psychopathy may be
associated with an altered and imbalanced inter-hemispheric dynamic; a
relatively hyperfunctioning LH and/or a hypofunctioning RH. Furthermore,
within the psychopathic population, the RH hypofunctioning is more
characteristic of primary psychopathy with its affective and
interpersonal deficits, while the LH hyperfunctioning is most typical of
the secondary psychopathy which is marked by impulsivity and antisocial
style.\" In \"There are More than Two Sides to Antisocial Behavior: The
Inextricable Link between Hemispheric Specialization and Environment,\"
a 2020 overview of studies into lateralization in people evincing
antisocial behaviors including psychopathy/sociopathy and Antisocial
Behavior Disorder, conducted by researchers at Bar Ilan University, the
authors write: \"Generally speaking, reduced RH activity appears to be
associated with impaired socioemotional and behavioral functioning, such
as the inability to withdraw from aversive and dangerous situations,
whereas disinhibition and impaired approach behaviors, such as
impulsivity, stimulation seeking, and aggression, have been linked
primarily to an overactive LH \[49--52\]. In accordance, there are
studies describing antisocial behavior characterized by affective and
interpersonal deficits, believed to be mediated by an underactive RH,
and antisocial behavior characterized by an impulsive, aggressive, and
reward-seeking style, associated with an overactive LH \[1,5,6,53\]\"

[]:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S019188691100119X>

[]:https://www.mdpi.com/2073-8994/12/10/1671>

367==depression is strongly linked to a hyperfunctioning right or
hypofunctioning left brain, as is stuttering==see \"Depression and the
hyperactive right-hemisphere,\" *Neuroscience Research*, Volume 68,
Issue 2, October 2010, or; \"Structural connectivity of right frontal
hyperactive areas scales with stuttering severity,\" *Brain: A Journal
of Neurology*, January 2018.

[]:https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20603163/>

[]:https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29228195/>

369 --- \'qualities shared with psychopathy and some forms of the other
\"Dark Tetrad\" subclinical personality traits==see The Society for the
Scientific Study of Psychopathy, \"About Psychopathy\"; also \"The
Gullibility of the Narcissist: What You Need to Know,\" *Psychology
Today*, August 13, 2018

[]:https://psychopathysociety.org/page/AboutPsychopathy?&hhsearchterms=%22psychopathy%22>

[]:https://www.psychologytoday.com/intl/blog/evolution-the-self/201808/the-gullibility-the-narcissist-what-you-need-know>

369==the brain\'s *plasticity*==A striking discovery of the past
half century is the degree to which our brains retain "neuroplasticity"
even into old age; an ability to reconfigure in response to fresh input.
In his book *The Brain that Changes Itself*, author Norman Doidge
recounts an experiment in which a blind subject was fitted with a
headpiece incorporating a camera, with a computer re-rendering images as
electrical impulses that were then sent to a patch on the subject\'s
arm. Over time the brain spontaneously sent this new information to the
visual cortex, allowing the subject to "see" shapes and silhouettes.
Medical science appears to be drawing closer to a generalized view that
the old "nature v nurture" debate was misguided; that we are all born
with genetic (and possibly epigenetic) propensities whose expression is
directed by experience. Only in the binary world of politics does the
old nature-nurture dispute live on unrevised, out of lazy rhetorical
convenience.

370==the pages are being scanned for the benefit of machines rather
than people\' -- as told to George Dyson, quoted in Franklin Foer,
*World Without Mind: The Existential Threat of Big Tech*, p54

370 --- **'**his company\'s leadership "does not care terribly much
about precedent or law'": this and a truly mindboggling collection of
other knowing legal breaches are detailed in \"Google 21st Century
Robber Baron,\" *Forbes*, September 19, 2011

[]:https://www.forbes.com/sites/scottcleland/2011/09/19/google-21st-century-robber-baron/?sh=7cf3f84a1d0d>

370 --- \'if you solve cancer, you\'d add about three years to people\'s
average life expectancy\==*Time*, September 18, 2013, \"TIME Talks to
Google CEO Larry Page About Its New Venture to Extend Human Life\"

[]:https://business.time.com/2013/09/18/google-extend-human-life/>

371 --- \'James Damore, decrying attempts to recruit women engineers==
from *Wired*, ibid., \"Three Years of Misery Inside the Happiest Company
in Tech,\" August 13, 2019: "'People would write stuff like that every
month,' says one former Google executive. When the subject of trying to
diversify Google\'s workforce comes up in big meetings and internal
forums, one black female employee says, 'You pretty much need to wait
about 10 seconds before someone jumps in and says we\'re lowering the
bar.'"

[]:https://longreads.com/2019/08/13/three-years-of-misery-inside-google-the-happiest-company-in-tech/>

371 --- \'or perhaps a CEO could be found trumpeting an abrasive culture
built on "the obligation to dissent"==In their 2014 book *How Google
Works,* Schmidt and co-author Jonathan Rosenberg described their idea of
the ideal creative environment. "In our experience, most smart creatives
have strong opinions and are itching to spout off; for them, the
cultural obligation to dissent gives them the freedom to do just that .
. . " Even though they might be annoying, he later told *Wired*, "You
need these aberrant geniuses because they\'re the ones that drive, in
most cases, the product excellence . . . they are better than other
technical people." Franklin Foer points out that Google did not invent
the idea of an "obligation to dissent," having borrowed it from the
management consulting firm McKinsey, "But it tied them together into a
coherent, aspirational narrative about engineers as free-thinking people
uniquely capable of reconfiguring the world from first principles."

371=="If you have something that you don't want anyone to know,
maybe you shouldn't be doing it in the first place"==from *The New York
Times* interviewing Jaron Lanier, November 8, 2017: "He \[Lanier\]
worries that these tech gods creating new worlds may be getting 'high on
their own supply' . . . Mr. Lanier believes that Facebook and Google,
with their 'top-down control schemes,' should be called \'Behavior
Modification Empires . . . He says sometimes his peers in the Valley
seem perfectly nice but then they will say something 'I just can't
believe.' He cites Eric Schmidt's comment on privacy on CNBC's 'Inside
the Mind of Google' special in 2009, that 'If you have something that
you don't want anyone to know, maybe you shouldn't be doing it in the
first place.'

'Really?' Mr. Lanier asks. 'It does give me this feeling sometimes that
something's going wrong with our culture in Silicon Valley and maybe
it's just that thing of power corrupting and absolute power corrupting
absolutely, just losing perspective.'"
[]:https://www.cnbc.com/inside-the-mind-of-google/>

For the record, Mark Zuckerberg said similar things, as when he told
Steven Levy, in *Hackers* (p475-6), that \"I never had this thing where
I wanted to have information that other people didn't." Which was
true---maybe---right up to the point at which it was no longer
convenient to him. He seems pretty keen on that kind of information
these days.

372==The engineer Yonatan Zunger . . . contributed to the ensuing
debate with a thoughtful *Medium* piece==see \"So, about this Googler's
manifesto,\" *Medium*, August 5, 2017.

[]:https://medium.com/@yonatanzunger/so-about-this-googlers-manifesto-1e3773ed1788>

373==Googleplex designer Clive Wilkinson now expresses regret over
his best-known work==see \"Architect behind Googleplex now says it\'s
\'dangerous\' to work at such a posh office,\" *NPR*, January 22, 2022.

[]:https://www.wwno.org/npr-news/2022-01-22/architect-behind-googleplex-now-says-its-dangerous-to-work-at-such-a-posh-office>

373==the departure of the legendary designer Jony Ive from Apple as
part of the "left-brain triumph==for a concise reading of Ive's
departure from Apple, see Tripp Mickle's "How Technocrats Triumphed at
Apple," *New York Times*, May 1, 2022.

[]:https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/01/technology/jony-ive-apple-design.html>

374==People who know these men speak of stunted individuals with
limited emotional range and capacity to connect==for detail on Thiel
and his protÃ©gÃ© Mark Zuckerberg, see *Zucked: Waking Up to the Facebook
Catastrophe* by VC and early Facebook investor Roger MacNamee, and *The
Contrarian: Peter Thiel and Silicon Valley\'s Pursuit of Power*, by
*Bloomberg* editor and writer Max Chafkin. For a concise sense of who
Thiel is, try Chakfin, \"Peter Thiel\'s Untold College Stories,\" *New
York* magazine, Sept 20, 2021, or; *The New Yorker*, "No Death, No
Taxes," by George Packer, Nov 20, 2011.

[]:https://nymag.com/intelligencer/article/peter-thiel-silicon-valley-contrarian-max-chafkin.html>

[]:https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/11/28/no-death-no-taxes>

374==Elon Musk reportedly suspects his ex-PayPal partner Thiel of
being a sociopath (while Thiel considers Musk a fraud and braggart.)\'
-- from Chafkin, *New York* magazine, *ibid*.: \"A person who has talked
to each man about the other put it more succinctly: 'Musk thinks Peter
is a sociopath, and Peter thinks Musk is a fraud and a braggart.' Twenty
years later, Thielism is the dominant ethos in Silicon Valley. That\'s
partly because Thiel has been effective at seeding the industry with
protÃ©gÃ©s---none of them more prominent than Mark Zuckerberg.\"

374 --- \'When Thiel parrots one of the former British Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher\'s most misunderstood claims==Thiel quoted in *The
New Yorker*, \"No Death, No Taxes: The libertarian futurism of a Silicon
Valley Billionaire,\" by George Packer, November 20, 2011. The second
volume of Thatcher\'s autobiography, published in 1993, revealed that
the constant and misleading use of her words ("there is no such thing as
society") by right wing conservatives, neoliberals and libertarians
pained her. She wrote: \"They never quoted the rest. I went on to say:
There are individual men and women, and there are families. And no
government can do anything except through people, and people must look
to themselves first. It's our duty to look after ourselves and then to
look after our neighbor. My meaning, clear at the time but subsequently
distorted beyond recognition, was that society was not an abstraction,
separate from the men and women who composed it, but a living structure
of individuals, families, neighbors and voluntary associations.\" Not
the libertarian's meaning at all.

374==Thiel has been open about his desire to blow up the very idea
of society, rationalizing his urge to a love of freedom and efficiency\'
-- *The New Yorker*, ibid. He also sees Asperger\'s as an advantage in
Silicon Valley: \"I think society is both something that\'s very real
and very powerful, but on the whole quite problematic,\" Thiel told the
economist Tyler Cowen. \"In Silicon Valley, I point out that many of the
more successful entrepreneurs seem to be suffering from a mild form of
Asperger\'s where it's like you\'re missing the imitation, socialization
gene,\" adding that Asperger\'s \"happens to be a plus for innovation
and creating great companies.\" In his 2014 book *Zero to One* he and
co-author Blake Masters write that, \"The hazards of imitative
competition may partially explain why individuals with an
Asperger\'s-like social ineptitude seem to be at an advantage in Silicon
Valley today. If you\'re less sensitive to social cues, then you\'re
less likely to do the same thing as everyone else around you.\" Roger
MacNamee does not agree, writing in *Zucked* that: \"What I did not
grasp was that Zuck\'s ambition had no limit. I did not appreciate that
his focus on code as the solution to every problem would blind him to
the human cost of Facebook\'s outsized success. And I never imagined
that Zuck would craft a culture in which criticism and disagreement
apparently had no place.\"

374==history starts to make sense==as one Facebook employee told
the *Washington Post* ("How Mark Zuckerberg broke Meta's workforce,"
April 30, 2023), "It's like they went from 'move fast and break things'
to 'slow down, break things,' then 'maybe fix it later on a case-by-case
basis.'" Of course they did. There's no compelling reason to think Mark
Zuckerberg can tell the difference between these things.

[]:https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/04/30/mark-zuckerberg-meta-layoffs/>
